here is a hypnotically dynastic quality to the Italian strand of football that simply cannot be matched elsewhere. Of course, football has been a family tradition all over the world, but the concept of a high-achieving player becoming the father of an even higher achieving son tends to be one that only calcio can truly pull off. As a prime example, the Maldini effect has reverberated around the San Siro for 65 years now.

For a generation of football observers, Cesare Maldini was simply the granite-faced head coach of the Italian national team at the 1998 World Cup in France – and father of the obscenely talented Azzurri captain, Paolo Maldini. A missed opportunity in a European-dominated tournament, Italy exited France 98 at the quarter-final stage in a penalty shootout to the hosts. Maldini senior was accused of using old fashioned tactics, when a bolder approach may have seen his team progress to the semi-finals.

At Wembley, 35 years earlier, Cesare was the lynchpin and victorious captain of AC Milan’s first European Cup-winning team. The first team outside the Iberian peninsula to be crowned the champions of Europe, it was success attained at a stadium that was considered to represent the birthplace of the game itself, even if it was a stadium that was criminally less than half full. The Wednesday afternoon kick-off restricted the attendance to just 45, 715. A widely unappreciated classic of a European Cup final, the 1963 finale was a masterpiece, Milan coming from behind to defeat the holders, Benfica, 2-1. Five years earlier, Cesare had been part of the Rossoneri side that was narrowly edged out in the 1958 final by the Real Madrid of Alfredo Di Stéfano, Raymond Kopa and Paco Gento.

On that Wednesday afternoon at Wembley in May 1963, Cesare finally fulfilled the Milan prophecy, setting the club on a trajectory that would see them become genuine European royalty in the decades to come. Donning the all-white Milan away strip alongside the focused Giovanni Trapattoni, a burgeoning Gianni Rivera, the under-heralded Brazilian playmaker Dino Sani and the wonderful José Altafini, Cesare lifted the trophy beneath the famous twin towers after a stylish fightback from a goal down against a Benfica side that boasted the fearsome talents of Eusébio. Indeed, it had been the great Eusébio who had opened the scoring.

A lead that Benfica nursed until just shy of the hour mark, it was Altafini who made himself the hero, scoring both Milan’s second-half goals, the winner laced with a compelling hint of offside. Yet, it was Cesare’s close attention to Eusébio that was the foundation upon which Altafini was able to strike forth. Under one of the coaching deities of catenaccio, Nereo Rocco, Cesare was indoctrinated in the ways of the football pitch being envisaged as a chessboard. Cesare was Rocco’s trusted on-pitch director of operations, a general on the field of play to the visionary on the touchline.