 is a certain type of player who is remembered and revered many years after he has departed a club. Often it is the archetypal homegrown hero, a Steven Gerrard, Matthew Le Tissier or a John Terry, a dedicated and passionate one-club man. Often it’s an outrageous foreign goalscorer or talisman: a Paolo Di Canio, Ossie Ardiles or an Eric Cantona. 

Rarely is it that a player who belongs to neither of these categories becomes a terrace hero. Yet the odd character unfathomably becomes a club legend, somehow striking a chord with fans and teammates alike. In the case of founding football league members Bolton, their own unlikely legend is undoubtedly the Spanish court jester of yesteryear, Iván Campo. 

His synonymous afro graced the Reebok for four memory-filled happy years, fostering an indescribable and undying love for the club and town that he adopted as his own.

Ivan Campo Ramos was born on 21 February 1974 in San Sebastián, the capital of the Basque Country in Spain. His youth development as a centre-half was spent first at Logroñes and then Alavés, where he made his big breakthrough as an 18-year-old in the 1993/94 season in the Spanish third tier. His promising showings in his first full season in senior football alerted scouts and eventually tempted LaLiga giants Valencia to take a gamble on him.

He was subsequently loaned out to LaLiga minnows Real Vallodolid during the 1995/96 season to get some much-needed experience at the highest level. His performances in 24 games were encouraging enough in a struggling team, who managed to stay up after sacking Rafa Benítez when languishing bottom of LaLiga after 22 games. 

He returned to Valencia for the 1996/97 campaign, making 25 league appearances with a solitary goal but failed to convince Los Che manager Jorge Valdano that he was of sufficient quality to make the long term step to regular first-team football. Thus the young Campo was released in the summer of 1997. 

Redemption arrived quickly for the young defender, however, snapped up by Real Mallorca in the Balearics who were newly promoted to LaLiga. That season in Palma, Campo formed an outstanding partnership with Marcelino Elina, later of Newcastle, in a vibrant team featuring a young Juan Carlos Valerón as Mallorca belied their outsider status to finish in a club-record fifth, qualifying for the UEFA Cup along the way.

Read  |  Remembering Sam Allardyce’s brilliant and brutal Bolton of Okocha, Djorkaeff, Hierro and Campo

That summer, Javier Clemente had seen something special in the young centre-back and selected Campo for his final 1998 World Cup squad. He was named as a substitute for the final two group games after his unfortunate participation in the opening, disastrous 3-2 reverse to a talented Nigeria team. 

Fresh from his involvement in his country’s disappointing group-stage exit, his rise to prominence and stand-out form the previous season had piqued the interest of Real Madrid. Indeed, European Cup-winning manager Jupp Heynckes had seen more than enough, engineering the move to turn Campo into a Madridista. Heynckes made him Real’s most expensive marquee signing in a summer of huge austerity at the Santiago Bernabéu, certainly when set against the madness of recent years. Campo set Real Madrid back the princely sum of £2.65m. 

Unfortunately for the Spaniard, five years of relative frustration ensued as he was pushed in and out of the team, although he did manage to make 60 appearances as a Los Blancos player, no mean feat for someone discarded so readily by an inferior side such as Valencia. He understandably struggled to dislodge the classy mainstays of the team at the time in Iván Helguera and a certain future Trotters teammate: Spain captain and, at the time, almost incredulously their all-time top goalscorer, Fernando Hierro.

The undoubted highlight of his Los Merengues’ career was in May 2000 in the Champions League final, a convincing 3-0 victory over his old club Valencia. Fernando Morientes, Steve McManaman and Raúl hit the goals as Campo played the full 90 minutes in a back three with Helguera and the now ex-Middlesbrough and Nottingham Forest manager Aítor Karanka, easily shutting out the much-vaunted Claudio López.

Just two short years later, in August 2002, Bolton fans came home from work to the astounding news we’d signed a player from Real Madrid, albeit on loan; one who was actually an active member of their first-team squad. The name that greeted us was Iván Campo. 

He was a player not all fans were overly familiar with, largely due to the lack of an interactive platform like Twitter to educate and inform. This left it to the likes of the limited Teletext, the pay-by-minute ClubCall service and the often ill-informed tabloids to give the everyday fan on the street the information on which to base their football knowledge. 

His appearance for Real Madrid in that one-sided Champions League final at the turn of the century may well have gone unnoticed to many observers, such was Real’s utter domination over their Spanish rivals and the concentration of pundits and neutral onlookers on their undoubtedly magnificent attacking talents on display that evening. 

